examples/README.md, before:

# Examples

There are some example calculations given with different usage scenarios. Please send us more calculations to include here.

## GPAW Example List

| Name              | Notes  | 
| ----------------- | ------ |
| Bulk-GaAs-noCIF   | Ground, DOS and Band calculations of bulk GaAs with PW. Positions are given with Atom object.          |
| Cr2O-spin         |Spin-dependent electronic properties of CrO2 |
| Graphene-LCAO     | Pristine graphene and graphene with defect with LCAO. Uses single config for two calculations. |
| MoS2-GW           | GW Approximation calculation for MoS2 |
| Si-2atoms-optical | Three step calculation. First step ground, DOS and Band calculations. Second and third steps for RPA and BSE optical calculations, respectively. Structure is given with CIF file. |
| Al-phonon         | Phonon dispersion calculation of bulk Aluminum |
| ZnO with DFT+U    | Wurtzite ZnO calculation with DFT+U. Positions are given with Bulk object. Hubbard params are: O-p: 7eV, Zn-d: 10eV|
| TiC-elastic-electronic | Elastic (EoS and Elastic Tensor) and Electronic Properties of Rocksalt TiC |
| Si-with-HSE | Ground state, DOS and band structure of Si with HSE06 Hybrid XC | 

## ASAP3 Example List

| Name              | Notes  | 
| ----------------- | ------ |
| ASAP3-Example     | Germanene nanosheet example with a general potential.          |

Commit message:

New example `Graphene-charged` is added

examples/README.md, after:

# Examples

There are some example calculations given with different usage scenarios. Please send us more calculations to include here.

## GPAW Example List

| Name              | Notes  | 
| ----------------- | ------ |
| Bulk-GaAs-noCIF   | Ground, DOS and Band calculations of bulk GaAs with PW. Positions are given with Atom object.          |
| Cr2O-spin         |Spin-dependent electronic properties of CrO2 |
| Graphene-LCAO     | Pristine graphene and graphene with defect with LCAO. Uses single config for two calculations. |
| Graphene-Charged  | Effect of charge in graphene with defect with LCAO  |
| MoS2-GW           | GW Approximation calculation for MoS2 |
| Si-2atoms-optical | Three step calculation. First step ground, DOS and Band calculations. Second and third steps for RPA and BSE optical calculations, respectively. Structure is given with CIF file. |
| Al-phonon         | Phonon dispersion calculation of bulk Aluminum |
| ZnO with DFT+U    | Wurtzite ZnO calculation with DFT+U. Positions are given with Bulk object. Hubbard params are: O-p: 7eV, Zn-d: 10eV|
| TiC-elastic-electronic | Elastic (EoS and Elastic Tensor) and Electronic Properties of Rocksalt TiC |
| Si-with-HSE | Ground state, DOS and band structure of Si with HSE06 Hybrid XC | 

## ASAP3 Example List

| Name              | Notes  | 
| ----------------- | ------ |
| ASAP3-Example     | Germanene nanosheet example with a general potential.          |
